---
layout: post
title: "conard1985greengold"
date: Tue Nov 17 16:33:27 2015
tags: [reading notes, greenbelts, open space, planning, Santa Clara County]
categories:
-
---

{% reference conard1985greengodl %}

p. 5: "The urban onslaught caused both local growers and county planners to
raise the issue of agricultural land protection, and together they carried
their cause to the state legislature. Equally important, the rapid
transformation sparked a farsighted land-use planning effort."

  * It did?

p. 5: In 1940 the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics constructed the
Ames Research Laboratory near Moffett Field. During the war, Stanford began
developing electronics equipment for the military. Between 1944 and 1950, over
50 new industries entered the valley, including IBM and Varian Associates.

p. 6: Industrial growth brought people, she claims. During the 1940s, the
county population grew 66%, compared to a statewide increase of 53%. During
the 1950s, the population increased 121% compared to a statewide increase of
49%. Subdivisions sprang up to support the population, often situated outside
of existing city boundaries in hinterlands and unincorporated areas. Between
1945 and 1950, farmland decreased from 727,000 acres to 589,000.

p. 6: Between 1946 and 1950, San Jose annexed land 32 times, while Santa Clara
annexed four tracts during the same period. In 1951, Santa Clara became more
aggressive, annexing six tracts that year and another nine in 1952, adding 500
acres to the city in two years. During that same two year period, San Jose
annexed sixteen parcels that totaled over 1000 acres.

p. 6: Cities worried that the rural-dominated county government would
intervene in annexations. The first sign of such came in 1951, when in January
Santa Clara County Planning Commission met with the Palo Alto City Planning
Commission. The city council requested the County take action to prevent
development on a greenbelt that separated the city from Mountain View. The
county declined at the time, but by 1953, in the face of aggressive
annexations, the "leapfrogging" of urban growth began angering growers.

p. 6: On April 8, 1953, the Santa Clara County Planning Commission proposed an
amendment to zoning ordinance to establish exclusive agricultural zones. The
exclusive zoning would prohibit "uses which would destroy the value of certain
areas for agricultural purposes." The ordinance, however, did not define
appropriate agricultural use to include nurseries, conservatories, arboreta,
riding academies, or hobby farmers. The ordinance passed in April 1954 and the
County created its first greenbelt, 744 acres of pear orchards near Agnew.

p. 7: The idea began with [Will Weston](), Nestor Barrett (county planning
director), and John Haas (county zoning administrator), who started planning
special zone districts. When [Karl Besler]() succeeded Barrett in May 1952, he
carried forward the idea and used his knowledge from his work on the 1930s
National Resources Planning Board. Belser proposed a "sphere of influence"
study that would set forth "an agricultural greenbelt (that) would divide
cities in order to keep them separate so they could keep their identities."
Belser mapped the best soil in the county, noting areas best suited for
watersheds, swampland, mountain open space, orchards and farms, light and high
density residential, commercial, industrial, and public uses. The goal was to
"preserve agricultural land" and "lend definition to the urban areas." City
leaders were critical of the plan, however, which they perceived as limiting
annexable areas and, thus, curbing urban expansion.

p. 12: Comprehensive plans emerging from the Santa Clara County Planning
Commission began equating agricultural land protection to the level of a
natural resource needing protection akin to national forests and national
parks. Most importantly, they needed to maintain agricultural land for food
needs. In a 1958 report from the Commission, [santaclara1958greengold](),
Belser wrote that the federal government or states create "permanent
agricultural reserves" to protect "priceless resource(s)" from "suburban
scatteration" that threatened "to become endless, monotonous megalopolis."
(quoted; 12)

pp. 12-13: The County planning documents often treated the county as two
separate areas, North and South, and advocated different approaches for each.
The Southern county plans tended to focus more heavily on greenbelts and
agricultural land, versus the more densely-developed northern county. Perhaps
county planners thought they had a chance to educate people about good
planning before the entire county was overrun by urbanization.

  * Conard also notes that "demographic change undermined the possibility of
  forming strong, sustainable rural-based political action." This is probably
  a good explanation for many of the urban/rural changes in the Bay Area --
  lots of people were new to the area, attracted for different reasons, and
  had no strong local ties to the area.

p. 13: Belser worked with Bruce F. Allen, an Assemblyman from Santa Clara
County, to introduce a bill to restrain cities from annexing lands zoned for
exclusive agricultural use. But amendments to the bill restricted
implementation to those counties that, as of December 31, 1954, included an
exclusive agricultural zone classification in the master plan (thus limiting
its impact on Santa Clara County) and an additional amendment proposed the
bill's expiration in two years. The Greenbelt Law passed, amended, in 1955; in
1957 legislation extended its provisions.

p. 14: In 1957 the state legislature passed the Agricultural Assessment Act
that tried to establish tax preferences for farmland -- the act was found
unconstitutional.

pp. 14-15: The final conservation bill that passed in 1965, known as the
[Williamson Act](), barely resembled what the County planners and growers
originally envisioned. Along with the Property Tax Assessment Reform Act of
1966, counties were able to extend preferential tax treatment to farmland
owners as long as they contracted to keep their farms producing for ten years.
Participation was voluntary. Thus, Conard concludes, the Williamson Act was
used as a "quasi-planning tool."

