---
layout: post
title: California Tomorrow
tags: [organization, California Tomorrow, Alfred Heller, Samuel Wood]
categories:
- Organization
---

[Alfred E. Heller]() and [Samuel E. Wood]() founded California Tomorrow as a non-profit
educational organization on June 24, 1961. The founding members were Heller,
president, William M. Roth, vice-president, Harold Berliner, secretary, and
Wood, executive director. The organization sought to connect environmentalists,
planers, and regulars and urged better planning processes to meet conservation
and urban growth.

The group recruited many well-known members to their Advisory Board, including
Wallace Stegner, Nathaniel Owings, Neil Morgan, Caspar Weinberger, Standish
Backus, Jr., Victor H. Palmieri, and Simon Eisner. They produced a 63-page
booklet entitled *California Going, Going . . .*, in which Heller and Wood wrote
about the consequences of unplanned urban growth and declining quality of life
that would follow if unchecked. The group is best known for its 1972 *California
Tomorrow Plan*, that offered an alternative to unrestricted urban growth. The
group sponsored statewide seminars to bring together experts and the public to
identify concerns and address challenges. In 1982, the organization also
produced *California 2000: The Next Frontier*.

## Archival History

*[The history below was written by the California Historical Society.]*

California Tomorrow, a nonprofit educational organization, was founded by Alfred
E. Heller and Samuel E. Wood. The first meeting was held on June 24, 1961, with
Alfred E. Heller named president, William M. Roth, vice-president, and Harold
Berliner secretary; Samuel E. Wood became executive director. The founding
members’ intent was to link the objectives of conservationists, planners, and
regulators and to urge the adoption of a widely integrated planning process to
meet the needs of both conservation and growth.

On Sept 16, 1961, the following Statement of Principles was adopted by the
Advisory Board:

> That our use of these resources should derive not from whim, but from careful
determination of how we believe we should live our lives, now and in the future,
and how we believe a healthy economy can be maintained;
>
> That individual gain is not alone sufficient reason for committing natural
resources to use, but that the greatest good to be gained by the greatest number
in the long run should be the controlling consideration in resources
policy-making, both private and public;
>
> That the work and activities of man should and can be so ordered that all
citizens of the state may continually enjoy the widest variety of choice of
environment, including quiet and light, pure air and water, and a fair share of
untrammeled green earth;

The group recruited many well-known members for its Advisory Board, including
Wallace Stegner, architect Nathaniel Owings, San Diego writer Neil Morgan,
Caspar Weinberger, Standish Backus, Jr., Victor H. Palmieri, and Simon Eisner,
Pasadena city planner. Assemblyman Willie Brown, Jr., and Harvey S. Perloff,
Dean of the UCLA School of Architecture, joined the Advisory Board in later
years. In their public debut, with a 63-page booklet entitled California Going,
Going…, Heller and Wood sounded an alarm about the dangerous consequences of
unplanned growth on the environment and future quality of life in the Golden
State. At a time when California was attracting 1,500 new residents each day,
they called for coordinated and comprehensive planning efforts between the
public and private spheres to “keep California beautiful and productive.” A
quarterly journal, Cry California, was launched in late 1965, initially edited
by William Bronson. It earned a solid reputation amongst the environmental press
for introducing new topics and exploring complicated issues.

However, the organization is perhaps best known for The California Tomorrow Plan
of 1972, which offered an alternative model for dealing with the challenges
facing the state in a systematic way. A series of statewide seminars brought
together members of the public and experts in the fields of planning,
conservation and government to identify specific regional concerns and exchange
ideas to address them, which were incorporated into The California Tomorrow
Plan. This format proved so successful that it was also employed in preparing
the 1982 publication, California 2000: The Next Frontier.

Faced with declining membership and financial problems along with a marked
change in political climate that affected grant funding, by the end of 1982
California Tomorrow was in a precarious situation. In April and May of 1983,
members of the Advisory Board and Board of Directors were requested to submit
their resignations and California Tomorrow’s activities were suspended. A
restructured organization with a different focus was established in 1984.
