---
layout: post
title: trounstine1982movers
tags: [reading list, Progress Committee, San Jose, agriculture, Dutch Hamann]
categories:
- Readings
---

[@trounstine1982movers]

p. 89: City boosters helped push for the hiring of [Dutch Hamann]() to serve as
the San Jose city manager. Hamann's only experience came from being a business
manager for the University of Santa Clara and a representative of an oil
company, but he proved to be a skilled politician and public relations savvy.

p. 89: Quotes a "later leader" on Hamann: "as a city manager, Dutch was the best
salesman we ever had."

p. 89: In addition to Hamann, the pro-growth coalition in San Jose also added to
their ranks the newspaper publisher Joseph Ridder, who bought the *Mercury* and
evening *News* in 1952. Under Ridder's leadership, the newspaper became
a vigorous advocate for city growth.

p. 89: Ridder: "We hope to make the *Mercury News* not only among the best
newspapers on the Pacific Coast but a vital and constructive force in the
development of San Jose and its territory."^[Quoted from the *San Jose Mercury*,
July 1952.]

p. 89: San Jose boomed over the next three decades; in 1950 the population was
95,280 and a compact 17 square miles; ten years later, the population was
204,196 and 64 square miles; by 1970, the city was 445,779 and sprawled 149
square miles, and in 1980 reached a population of 625,763.

p. 90: Identifies four components that helped San Jose growth: friendly local
government, plentiful land, and technological skill, federal money.

p. 90: By 1979, 200,000 residents of the county were directly or indirectly
employed by the electronics industry. Santa Clara County received $2 billion
annually in federal defense contracts, 3 percent of the national total.

p. 91: With the influx of jobs and residents, cities happily provided zoning.
Because of the Veterans Administration and the Federal Housing Administration,
mortgage insurance allowed many Americans to purchase private suburban homes
and helped developers create residential developments.

p. 91: Federal and state aid provided the city and its industries with water
and subsidized construction of sewage treatment facilities. But their biggest
assistance came from highway construction. Three major freeways were built,
one encircling San Jose, another through the city, and another that connected
the city to San Francisco, Oakland, the Pacific Coast, and Southern
California.

p. 89-91: In other words, the support of the *San Jose Mercury* and Hamman and
the city council could only do so much to support growth; the additional
factors of federal spending on defense, the location of industry, the
migration of people, federal housing policies, highway construction, and
infrastructure projects gave San Jose a way to grow. The combination of
internal and external sources gave San Jose its growth.

p. 92: The boosters of San Jose remained in power in the city council
virtually unchallenged between 1944 and 1969. Between 1950 and 1965 the
Chamber of Commerce spent millions on advertising campaigns to lure industry
to the city. Industry had the city on their side; when IBM planned to expand
their headquarters, San Jose annexed the area for their convenience.

p. 92: The *Mercury* extolled the benefits of new industry, noting that it
provided a "year round [rather than seasonal] industrial payroll."

p. 92: In 1940, 101,666 acres were devoted to orchards; by 1973, only 25,511
acres remained.

p. 92: "San Jose was, in fact, more vigorous and successful at promoting
growth in housing than in industry, perhaps because the profits were more
immediate."

p. 92: Former mayor [George Starbird]() explained: "Dutch [Hamann] built a city
organization that provided the right atmosphere for the developer and
subdivider. The city employees were cooperative. The city council exuded
friendship, and togetherness was a by-word." (quoted, 92)

p. 92: "The city approved 491 annexations between 1950 and 1960 and more than
900 in the next decade, adding 132 square miles to its domain."

p. 92: Annexations were sometimes coerced and hustled; instead of the planning
department overseeing annexation, the practice the city manager remained in
charge. They often went door-to-door persuading farmers and residents to
support annexation. Growth was so quick that mapmakers could not keep up and
began selling stickers to add to their master map.

p. 93: Hamann once explained:

> If you wanted to grow and be able to pay the bill, you had to annex
> surrounding areas to the city. To do that you couldn't sit on your hands.
> Pretty soon you would become like Bakersfield and St. Louis, an enclave
> circled by small incorporated cities or special service districts that
> would tie you up forever. If you got bottled up, your tax rate would put you
> out of the running for new industries. (93)

p. 93: San Jose developed a policy of "shoestring" or "strip" annexation that
added streets or one side of a street in order to reach desirable parcels of
land. San Jose sought key intersections for shopping centers or to block
expansion of adjacent cities. City leaders justified these leapfrog
annexations because, in the words of Hamann, one large city was "better . . .
than a lot of little ones." (quoted, 93) The gaps in leapfrogging were
,the city reasoned, to be filled in by future developers.

p. 93: The city often ignored criticism of its annexation policies, despite
lawsuits to the city that attempted to delay or deny annexation. Officials
often annexed areas around hold-outs, assuming they would eventually give in.

pp. 93-94: Groups of residents to the south and east of the city attempted to
incorporate in order to avoid annexation; their attempts failed. Santa Clara
got into an annexation contest with San Jose.

p. 94: School districts formed the most serious opposition. Until 1954 state
law dictated that school districts and cities had to have the same boundaries;
when a city annexed territory, that territory joined the city's school
district. Rural schools near San Jose saw their tax base and school districts
disappearing and responded with lawsuits. Resistance ended when San Jose state
legislators passed a law separating school districts from municipal
boundaries. The authors conclude: "But the children of San Jose today attend
school in two dozen different districts, a factor that has contributed to the
city's fragmented politics, lack of identity, and racial segregation."

p. 94: When annexation wasn't enough, the city would move to consolidate. They
attempted with Milpitas and Alviso; Milpitas won their battle but Alviso
failed.

p. 94: The city had flexible land-use policies that enticed land owners and
developers. San Jose had no general plan until state and federal law in 1960
required a general plan. Even then, the 1960s general plan was "not much more
than a collection of the public works department's maps of streets, sewers,
and storm drains. No policy goals were included." San Jose cared little for
planning.

p. 95: The city often approved subdivisions on flood plains, hillsides,
earthquake faultlines, and wetlands and areas without water or sewer
connections. Such flexible land use policies meant developers would like
choose to annex to San Jose rather than other nearby cities. For example,
Milpitas required a 6,000 square foot minimal lot size for residential
development; San Jose required 5,000 square feet.

pp. 95-96: To support capital improvements -- sewers, roads -- the city needed the
money of tax payers, which they sought through general obligation bonds.
Typically, bonds are authorized by voters to allow the city to borrow money at
low interest over time. The money is then spent on improvements -- roads,
libraries -- and payment is usually generated through increased property
taxes. But in San Jose, the bill went to property owners but largely
benefited developers. In bond elections in 1957, 1961, 1966, and 1969, voters
approved $134 million in general obligation bonds. While these bonds were
largely propagandized by Hamann and the *Mercury*, they also received
promotion from a group known as the "[Book of the Month Club]()" made up of
contractors, developers, businessmen, and public officials. They raised
$57,000 for the 1966 bond campaign from major contributions coming from
construction companies and contractors -- San Jose Water Works, Pacific
Telephone, Pacific Gas and Electric, the Real Estate Board, the Chamber of
Commerce, packers, and canners.

p. 96: Mayor Starbird: "much of the growth of the city was due to the
confidence of the investment interests in New York in San Jose bonds --
Hamann, the real architect of this city, had a lot to do with that."

p. 96: Hamann: "You don't build a city by staying in a vacuum. You build, you
sell . . . And I was the gun for hire."

p. 96: Development occurred where developers wanted to develop. Sewers, for
example, were placed 'by putting pins in a map with each inquiry from a
developer; when there were enough pins, a sewer line was built." (citing
Mandich thesis)

p. 97: "San Jose's greatest weapon in the annexation wars was its control of
the sewer system. What water was to Los Angeles, sewage was to San Jose." In
the 1880s the city built a sewage outlay to the San Francisco Bay to handle
cannery effluent (sewers large enough to support a city of 250,000), although
by the 1930s the city faced the wrath of the state. When the state threatened
to cancel building permits, the city passed bonds in 1950 to begin building a
new sewage treatment facility. The city was repeatedly cited -- 1967, 1979,
and 1980 -- but the city had the first and largest sewer system in the South
Bay.

p. 97: "San Jose used this sewage monopoly in its battles with adjacent cities
and with recalcitrant landowners." The city council banned outside links to
the system in 1951; to be part of the system, you had to pay with annexation.

p. 97: Hamann: "We're in this fight to the finish, and if we have to use
sewage disposal to bring [neighboring] Santa Clara to some point of reasoning,
we'll do it." (San Jose Mercury, February 6, 1952)

p. 97: Although no outright illegal activity was ever proven, plenty of
collusion between builders, merchants, and politicians occurred. The exchange
of information for land speculation and building was common. Hamann was
involved in more than fifty property transactions during his tenure, some of
which became the site of major intersections and shopping centers.

p. 99: Part of the motivation of San Jose leaders was to keep the city
independent. They resisted the "ranch house conservatism" of the county
government, which wanted to retain agricultural buffers among the towns. San
Jose resisted inclusion in the San Francisco-Oakland standard metropolitan
statistical area by the census bureau. The city rejected participation in the
Bay Area Rapid Transit District in 1957. And, a decade later, San Jose
bristled at participating in a federal government mandate for a regional
council of governments.

p. 99: Newcomers eventually outnumberd old-timers, and these new residents
began to distrust the leadership that dominated the growth machine. They faced
their first grassroots challenge in 1962, as residents questioned the growth
ethic of the city council.

p. 99: Mayor George Starbird: "The election of 1962 cast a shadow that falls
across our political scene even today."

p. 99: In 1962, San Jose elected councilwoman Virginia Shaffer and two other
members who were anti-incumbent platforms and supporting homeowners
organizations. Mayor Starbird claimed that "City Hall audiences became unruly
for the first time in history. . . . You could not seem to get the pulse of
the voters--what they actually wanted."

pp. 99-100: Troustine argues that understanding voters wasn't difficult. The city
had grown so quickly that the city couldn't provide the services residents
wanted and expected. She claims that "new residents didn't care much about
what had been there before them. What they did care about was their own
immediate environment and, to a lesser extent, the loss of the remaining open
space."

p. 100: Trounstine argues that the most important issue for new residents were
the inadequacy of city services: police, fire, libraries, parks, streets, and
schools. **[I'm not sure this is correct -- how does Hayes' voter survey
correspond to this claim?]**

p. 100: Shaffer and homeowners reflected anger towards inadequate city
services, tax burdens, and the emphasis on growth. They condemned poor
developments, some built on hillsides subject to earthslides, and unconnected
or poorly constructed water connections.

pp. 100-101: A recall effort to oust council members who supported Hamann was
launched by Shaffer and supporters in 1962, but the *Mercury News* and the old
guard rallied around Hamann. They survived the recall, but their share of the
vote was below landslide. Trounstine argues this is evidence that "changes
were brewing, but they chose to ignore them: immediately after the election
they reaffirmed the city's aggressive annexation policy."

p. 103: In 1969 homeowners finally succeeded, with three of their candidates
being elected to the city council including with the city's first avowed
environmentalist. Hamann resigned shortly afterwards and a new city manager
was hired in 1970. The annexation policy was dropped and replaced with an
urban development policy emphasizing improvements in the city's existing
boundaries. In 1971 another environmentalist, Janet Gray Hayes, was elected to
the council. Starbird lamented: "the voices of the builders and the doers
became lost in the many-voiced demands of the users. The veto was back."

p. 104-015: In 1978 Hayes faced a run-off election with Al Garza, representing
the interest of builders and developers as well as the Hispanic community. a
new block of four votes on the council (called the Fearsome Foursome) pushed
for development, fired the city manager. But they fell apart when one resigned
following his second episode of public drunkenness and another was defeated in
an election.

p. 107: A sewage spill in 1979 nearly destroyed marine life in the southern
Bay; another in 1980 made conditions worse.

Progress Committee
------------------

The Progress Committee was formed in 1944 by merchants, attorneys,
industrialists, and major property owners in order to "build . . . a new
metropolis in the place of sleepy San Jose." (quoted, 87)

In order to achieve their vision of progress for San Jose, they had to
displace unions and large landowners who held the political power in the city.
They produced candidates and, with the newspapers endorsement, swept into
the city council. They fired city manager Goodwin, the police chief, and the
fire chief, charging them with "bossism," "mismanagement," and "political
interference." (quoted, 87)

The Committee itself ceased to exist shortly after the election, but their
ideas held sway in the city council for the next thirty years. With
subsidation from city and county government, the Chamber of Commerce began a
$60,000 advertising campaign in 1944 to attract industrial development. The
Food Machinery and Chemical Corporation (FMC), already in the area, expanded their
operations. IBM built a headquarters in the city, General Electric, Pittsburgh
Steel, Owens-Corning, and Kaiser all build plants in or near San Jose. (88)

Dissent in the Progress Committee came in 1946 when one of the original
members called the committee "reactionaries" and accused them of favoritism
towards FMC and for selling the company municipal land well below market
value. A court agreed with these charges. Others dissented with the
Committee's plan for the private ownership of water and called for municipal
ownership of the water infrastructure, but the Progress Committee (with the
newspaper) silenced critics with accusations of socialism. (88)

Water remained private, but other investments were required to bring the
Committee's vision to life. They needed "streets, storm drains, an improved
sewer system, an airport, a new city hall, and even a deep water port"
Building these required voter approval of general obligation bonds so the city
could borrow money over the long term at low interest rates. The bonds,
however, were paid for by property taxes -- a move voters disagreed with.
Voters continually voted against these measures; even though sewage was a
unique problem for San Jose given its cannery businesses. Voters continued to
vote against special treatment for canneries and sewers; the problem of sewers
became such a problem that by 1948 "the state even declared San Jose in
violation of pollution regulations." (88)

Another city manager, hired to replace Goodwin, resigned office in 1950. The
boosters wanted someone who shared their vision and could gain support for
bond votes. They hired [Dutch Hamann](), whose experience only included being
a business manager for the University of Santa Clara and a representative for
an oil company. But his connection to the university proved beneficial because
it was the alma mater for many of the Catholic business leaders in the
community as well as Mayor [Albert Ruffo](). As one leader described Hamann,
"as city manager, Dutch was the best salesman we ever had." (quoted, 89)

San Jose Mercury
----------------

An additional booster came in the form of [Joe Ridder]() and the *San Jose
Mercury*. In 1952 the Hayes family sold the newspaper to the Ridder
newspapers. Ridder defined the new mission of the newspaper, which had lost
interest in San Jose: "We hope to make the *Mercury News* not only among the
best newspapers on the Pacific Coast but a vital and constructive force in the
development of San Jose and its territory." (quoted, 89)

Ridder once claimed that "we don't have newspapers, we have catalogues."
(quoted, 97)
