---
layout: post
title: lindsay1955planninggrowth
tags: [agriculture, Santa Clara County, urban growth, land use]
categories:
- Readings
---

***Planning for Growth: A Report on the Status of City and County Planning in California* (Sacramento: Assembly of the State of California, 1955)**

p. 43: "All of the subdivisions developed during the post war years in the
northwest part of Santa Clara County, if combined, would cover approximately
seven square miles of land--yet they are, in fact, dotted over 200 square
miles of prime agricultural land, with at least one subdivision located in
each square mile."

p. 43: One of the "serious implications" of the lack of a policy for guiding
urban development has been "the direct threat . . . posed to the agricultural
base of Santa Clara County, and the hastening of the day that it ceases to
contribute to the economy of Santa Clara County and the state as a whole."

p. 43: "For agricultural purposes, the growing of prunes and apricots,
agricultural land will sell for approximately \$800 to \$1500 per acre. For
subdivision or industrial purposes, the same land brings prices of \$4000 per
acre and higher."

pp. 43-44: Problems facing orchardists who are paying higher taxes as a result
of higher assessed valuation.

p. 44: Notes that bonds for schools, sewers, flood control improvements, and
so on are voted on and often approved by orchardists' neighbors, who have many
more registered voters than the farmer can stand up to. The farmer faces a
higher valuation and higher taxes to "pay for municipal services he does not
need." The increase cost in operating a farm "cannot, unfortunately, be
reflected in the price he gets for his apricots or prunes. He may very well be
forced to put his land on the market for sale, for subdivision, long before he
wants to, because economically, he can no longer farm."

The report offers an analysis:

* The two hundred square miles of prime ag land "is sufficient to provide
living area for well over 1,000,000 people, if fully developed to the
densities now observed in the City of San Jose, for example, at the densities
now evident in the subdivisions that have been constructed." (p.  44)
* "Even if the population growth in this unincorporated county area continues
at a high rate of 10,000 persons per year, it would take 100 years to develop
all of the agricultural land now about completely committed to subdivisions."
(p. 44)

p. 45: In 1950 the Santa Clara County had a population of 68,202 in an area of
77,000 acres, with a population density of less than one person per acre. In
contrast, San Jose had a population density of 8.09 people per acre. If the
county followed San Jose's density, the 77,000 acre area would accomodate
600,000 people.

p. 45: "some 89,000 acres of agricultural land were converted to other uses
between 1946 and 1953; a continuation of this rate of disappearance would
eliminate all farm land in the Santa Clara Valley by 1960!"

p. 46: "aimless destruction of agricultural resources"
