---
layout: post
title: "raw/griffinchatham1958industrial"
date: Sat Nov 21 22:26:35 2015
tags: [fruit industry, Cupertino, Palo Alto]
categories: 
- 
---

{% reference griffinchatham1958industrial %}

p. 3: The industries prior to World War II were primarily food processing and
distribution: Libby and Del Monte (canners); Sunsweet (packing); Paul Masson
and Almaden (wineries); Pictsweet (frozen food); Food Machinery and Chemical
(manufacturing).

p. 3: The canneries process more than 30 percent of the state's crop of fruit
and vegetables. The valley itself produced only a small part, but its location
of packing plants near rail, highway, and water routes of northern California
attracts produce from farm districts north of the Tehachapi Range.

pp. 3-4: After World War II, new growth of industries. Among the first was
Permanente Company near Cupertino, taking advantage of local raw materials and
supply cement to Shasta Dam. International Business Machines constructed a
half-million dollar plant near downtown San Jose. The Monarch Match Company
built a plant to turn out paper book matches. International Mineral and
Chemicals Company built a $3 million enterprise to produce food seasoning, and
General Electric built a $3 million facility for building electric motors.
These mostly clustered around San Jose-Santa Clara area.

p. 4: Industrial activity spread in the valley. Westinghouse built a plant
near Sunnyvale; Ferry-Morse Seeds near Mountain View; Kaiser built an aluminum
foil plant at Permanente. Others included the Falstaff Brewing Corporation in
San Jose; Sylvania Electric Corporation in Mountain View; Owens-Corning
Fiberglass Corporation in Santa Clara; Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel; Monsanto
Chemical; Levi-Strauss; and Owens-Illinois Glass. Ford Motor opened a
manufacturing plant near Milpitas in March 1955. Near Moffett Field, Lockheed
built a facility for research, development, testing, and manufacturing.

p. 4: Noting some raw materials that are important to the area: sand, gravel,
and stone, for local building industry; salt, important to chemistry and
processing industrial projects; chromite, important to steel hardening and
corrosion resistance ("hence contributes to the national defense stockpile");
and quicksilver, for making mirrors & instrumentation components. Also gold,
silver, and magnesia extracted from sea water, trace elements, and timber.
Chromite has "a vast potential of expansion" used primarily for steel
hardening, chrome metal surfacing, and refractory brick used in steel
furnaces.

p. 6: Industries come to the area for a variety of reasons, but among these
factors are three important ones: "'brain power,' equable and stimulating
climate, and what may be called for lack of a better term 'the good life.'"

p. 6: Highly educated area; in Palo Alto, thirty-four percent of adult men
have four years of college (compared to 7% in the nation) and 23% of women
have degrees (compared to 5% nationally).

p. 6: "Thus the County's electronics industry tends to be one of young men,
big ideas, and high capabilities."

p. 9: The study looks at seven planning areas: Palo Alto, Mountain View,
Sunnyvale, Alviso, Santa Clara, San Jose, and Milpitas.

