---
layout: post
title: "raw/benner1982stormclouds"
date: Tue Aug 26 16:43:56 2014
tags: [lorraine_ross san_jose fairchild]
categories: 
- 
---

Citation
--------

Susan Benner, "[Storm Clouds Over Silicon Valley](http://www.inc.com/magazine/19820901/3259.html)," *Inc* (September 1982), pp. 84-89.


Transcription
-------------

The deception began with the absence of smokestacks. There were squat vents on 
the roofs of high-technology companies instead of the steel mills' 
black-belching pipes to the sky. There was no smoke. Sure, once in a while the 
people who lived around the plants would smell something like bleach or 
ammonia, and occasionally they would see oddly colored steam. But generally, 
the residents of Santa Clara County didn't worry. After all, it wasn't as if 
they were living next door to Hooker Chemicals.

Besides, there was this feeling that the low cement-and-glass buildings were 
sheltering a technological and economic revolution. People kept hearing about 
talking calculators and companies that were taking on IBM. They saw the 
Mercedes and the Ferraris and the new houses being built in the hills. Their 
kids played with little Apple computers at school. Their neighbors went to 
work dressed like students and worked out at corporate swimming pools and 
gyms. Even the entrepreneurs rolled up their sleeves, loosened their ties, and 
expected everyone to call them by their first names. Steven Jobs, just a kid, 
one of the founders of Apple Computer Inc., made the cover of Time magazine. 
The whole country was swept up in this high-technology entrepreneurial 
movement, and the heart of it was right in their own backyard, among the tract 
houses and the Spanish-style shopping malls in the 1,351.9-square-mile valley 
located 47 miles south of San Francisco that had become known as Silicon 
Valley.

The cities in the Valley -- Palo Alto, Sunnyvale, Santa Clara, and San Jose, 
for instance -- decided that they liked this high technology. They zoned more 
land for industrial development. They built new sewers and roads. They 
supplied the power, the water, the direct labor force, and the bright young 
engineering graduates from Stanford, Berkeley, San Jose State, and the 
University of Santa Clara.

The entrepreneurs used these resources to build the densest concentration of 
fast-growing, highly profitable technology companies in the world. They 
thought of Silicon Valley as not only the geographical but the spiritual 
center of high technology. It was where Lee De Forest perfected the vacuum 
tube and William Hewlett and David Packard first set up shop in Packard's 
garage. William Shockley started Shockley Transistor Corp. in Palo Alto, and 
Shockley alumni begat Fairchild Semiconductor and at least 40 other companies. 
The Valley nurtured a $40 billion industry, and it became the home of its 
stars -- Bob Noyce (Intel), Jimmy Treybig (Tandem Computers), Jerry Sanders 
(Advanced Micro Devices), Nolan Bushnell (Atari), and Ken Oshman (Rolm).

The newcomers, and there were many, liked the weather, the ocean, the nearness 
of San Francisco. But above all, they thrived on the faith held by bankers, 
public relations firms, venture capitalists, suppliers, and even their 
neighbors, that things happened in Silicon Valley, that this was where people 
made it. "There's a sense of being pioneers here," says Mark Leslie, president 
and one of the founders of start-up Synapse Computers Corp. "I view myself as 
the kind of guy who would have been living in Detroit in 1910. The future 
depends on high technology, and we are spearcheading it."

It is difficult to say just when the unquestioning optimism and enthusiasm 
ended, when people began to suspect that the growth had been too fast, that 
technological wonders and millionaires in shirt-sleeves weren't going to solve 
the Valley's problems, and, in fact, created some of their own.

While the entrepreneurs focused on growth and squeezing more bits on chips, a 
dairy became a computer graphics company, an onion field the site of a 
mainframe manufacturer. Since 1950, 85,000 acres of fruits, nuts, berries, and 
vegetables have become shopping malls, parking lots, electronics companies, 
and condominiums. As the freeways filled with cars, the hills grew hazy behind 
the smog, and the driving time of some six-mile commutes lengthened to 45 
minutes. In September 1979 the classified advertising section of the San Jose 
Mercury News swelled to 93 pages, and not all of the jobs could be filled. 
Young engineers from Ann Arbor and Madison began turning down job offers in 
the industry's heartland. Toxic chemicals were found in public drinking water. 
Employees stole chips and circuit designs and sold them on a high-technology 
black market. Some of the stolen goods and processes even made their way to 
the Soviet Union.

There were stories in the local papers about the traffic, the cost of houses, 
and the theft of chips, but, at first, many were dismissed as the hysterics of 
the press. The problems just didn't seem that serious. Surely, the 
entrepreneurs reasoned, a little traffic was a small sacrifice for the jobs, 
the new improved pacemakers, and the computers that didn't fail. They could 
solve the problems with car pools and sabbaticals and better chips. But car 
pools and sabbaticals weren't solutions. They just helped the companies cope. 
The same characteristics that enabled the entrepreneurs to build companies -- 
optimism, singlemindedness, a focus on the future, faith in American 
technology -- kept them from turning their considerable problem-solving skills 
to what was really happening to the Valley that for many had been so 
supportive.

Rafael Rodriguez had always wanted to live in California. As a kid growing up 
in New York City in the '60s, he had heard about the Beach Boys, surfing, 
tanned easygoing people, the low crime rate. Soon after completing his studies 
at Pratt Institute in electrical engineering, he flew out to the West Coast to 
interview for jobs. In New York City he knew of only three or four companies 
that were actively seeking young engineers. In California he saw jobs 
advertised on billboards. After interviewing with corporations up and down the 
coast, Rodriguez accepted an offer from Watkins-Johnson Co. in San Jose for an 
engineering position that paid $26,500 a year.

Although Watkins-Johnson had warned its new recruit about the cost of housing 
in Santa Clara County, Rodriguez wasn't worried. He had picked up a few 
brochures from real estate agents on his interview trip and seen houses he 
thought were in his price range. He told his wife he would move out to the 
West Coast, start working, and find a house as quickly as he could for them 
and their three kids.

Rodriguez liked California as much as he had dreamed he would. He enjoyed the 
weather, and he loved his job. But days, and then weeks, slipped by, and he 
didn't find a house. Apartments comparable to the one he had in New York were 
renting for more than half his monthly paycheck.

When the 30 days that Watkins-Johnson had agreed to put him up in a hotel ran 
out, Rodriguez moved in temporarily with a third cousin of his wife. He saw an 
$80,000 house 30 minutes from his job that he thought would do nicely, but he 
was turned down for a mortgage because he hadn't been working long enough. He 
didn't like the "starter houses" the real estate agents showed him. He was 
making a good salary, and he figured he and his family deserved to live in a 
nice place.

Finally, after six weeks, his wife had had enough. She told him she thought he 
ought to come home and find a job in New York. After talking it over, 
Rodriguez agreed. He broke the news to his new employer the next morning. 
Watkins-Johnson was "slightly astounded," Rodriguez says, but very 
understanding. His boss told him to fly home, talk to his wife, and make sure 
that moving back East was what he really wanted.

Rodriguez waited till he returned to New York City to make his resignation 
final, but resign he did. Today he is working for Sperry Gyroscope in Great 
Neck, N.Y.

Rodriguez's return to New York is a recruiter's nightmare. The difficulty of 
attracting young engineers to Santa Clara County has become one of the most 
talked about problems in the Valley. In spite of the weather, the ocean, San 
Francisco, and the Valley's reputation as a hotbed of innovation, bright young 
engineers are turning down Silicon Valley offers and instead taking jobs in 
Salem, Oreg.; Phoenix; Colorado Springs; and Durham, N.C.

"Young guys, recent graduates, come out from somewhere like Ann Arbor, spend a 
day going through the company, say they like what they see, and then go out to 
look at houses in the area and decide to go back to graduate school," says 
Charles McEwan, president of Ramtek Corp., a $46 million computer graphics 
company in Santa Clara, currently adding 75 to 100 employees per year. "We 
tell the guys with wives and three or four children to stay home, that the 
price of a four-bedroom house is out of reach."

It really shouldn't have been much of a surprise. The people who had come to 
work for Fairchild and Intel Corp. had helped double the population of Santa 
Clara County twice in 30 years, from 290,547 in 1950 to 1,265,200 in 1980. To 
accommodate Lockheed Missiles & Space, Hewlett-Packard, Memorex, and IBM, more 
than 40% of the potential housing capacity was earmarked for industrial uses, 
which meant 417,000 fewer housing units for high-technology employees. In 
1980, Santa Clara County had 703,500 jobs but only 471,200 housing units, and 
the resulting shortage, aggravated by speculation, had nudged the average 
price of a house to well over $100,000. In 1980, 10,000 jobs went unfilled.

By February 1, 1982, when Rodriguez accepted the position at Watkins-Johnson, 
the orchards had been bulldozed for industrial parks, roads had been filled 
beyond their capacity, and downtown Sunnyvale had been razed for a shopping 
center. The San Jose Municipal Airport had become the ninth businest in the 
United States. The county had been built up so densely that it had less open 
space per resident than New York City.

The entrepreneurs found that while they had been inventing calculators that 
could fit on a watch face, the cost of industrial space had tripled. Says 
Ralph Ungermann, founder of Zilog Inc., and now Ungermann-Bass Inc.: "Space 
that leased for 40? a square foot in 1978 [when he left Zilog] was going for 
80? a square foot in 1979 and is now up to \$1.25." The price of raw land in 
Santa Clara County, when it can be found, is currently running \$8 to \$12 a 
square foot, compared with 20? a square foot in Austin, and 65? in Colorado 
Springs, according to Klaus Kramer, Rolm Corp.'s director of real estate and 
facilities planning. Late last year, Rolm couldn't even find the 125 acres it 
wanted for a new plant in South San Jose.

For a while, many of the entrepreneurs remained convinced that high-technology 
companies could cope with the problems. Managers responded to traffic problems 
with flexible work hours and ride-sharing programs. They paid higher rents, 
telling themselves it still wasn't as expensive as Boston or other East Coast 
metropolitan areas. They sometimes subsidized housing for key executives. They 
offered stock option plans and bonuses and sabbaticals to entice their 
employees to stick around. Durango Systems Inc., a \$15 million company in San 
Jose, announced that it would give employees with four years of service a 
choice of a six-week paid sabbatical or round trip air fare for two anywhere 
in the world, plus \$500 spending money and two extra weeks of vacation.

High fliers Tandem Computers Inc. and Rolm offered corporate campuses equipped 
not only with cafeterias and parking lots, but also with swimming pools, par 
courses, and volleyball courts, and in Rolm's case, a weight room, a gym, a 
whirlpool bath, racquetball and tennis courts, and aerobics lessons. Silconix 
Inc. in Santa Clara offered discounted gasoline to employees three days a week 
at the company self-service station. And in 1980, an assembly worker at 
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. won $240,000 in a company drawing.

But there were some people who started looking at the bigger picture, and they 
didn't like what they saw. In a survey by the Center for Policy Studies at the 
University of Texas at Dallas, corporate executives across the country ranked 
Silicon Valley behind Dallas, Denver, Atlanta, the Research Triangle in North 
Carolina, and even Houston as a desirable place to locate a company. Larger 
companies like Hewlett-Packard and Intel have spun off divisions in 
second-tier high-technology areas like Austin, Boise, the Research Triangle, 
and Phoenix for the last three or four years. Rolm purchased land for 
expansion in Austin and Colorado Springs. John Wensley left the Bay Area to 
start his company, August Systems Inc., in Salem, Oreg. Ramtek began testing a 
new twist on manufacturing at a remote location by setting up a unit to make 
custom systems in Napa, north of San Francisco. And there were entrepreneurs 
at companies too small to reorganize into divisions who began to wonder what 
was going on in the Valley but didn't want to move their companies away from 
the services and suppliers available there.

While the enterpreneurs were once again absorbed in their own aspects of the 
problems, Santa Clara County residents began to realize that the 
high-technology superstars were generating jobs and taxes but that the jobs 
attracted more people, and the taxes not only didn't make the communities 
rich, but sometimes failed to cover the costs of growth -- the roads, houses, 
schools, sewer systems, expanded police and fire departments, and public 
transportation system. Sunnyvale found itself facing a \$15 million sewage 
system expansion and \$6 million to \$10 million in transportation expenditures. 
Fire departments had to add special equipment and people to deal with chemical 
emergencies. Hobbled by Proposition 13's limits on property tax revenues, the 
cities didn't know where the money would come from.

"I don't see the taxes and the economic growth," says Lorraine Ross, a native 
of San Jose. "I see the traffic, the congestion, the lack of police, the lack 
of firemen, the lack of libraries. We're lucky if a policeman makes it to our 
neighborhood once a week. We have the highest burglary rate in the entire 
Valley, and we don't live in a ghetto.

"Santa Clara was a delightful place to live," Ross continues. "It has the most 
temperate climate in the United States. Yet people who live here [and don't 
work for the high-technology companies] cannot afford to buy a home." The 
average price of a house in her neighborhood is \$115,000 for a "tiny 
1,300-square-foot house." Just six years ago Ross and her husband bought their 
three-bedroom house for \$45,000.

Yet it was not the price of a house that caused the waltz between the 
entrepreneurs and the residents to end. The residents didn't like setting 
aside 50% or more of their income to buy a place to live, but they might have 
done it. They didn't enjoy idling in morning traffic, but they might have 
looked at that as a price of progress. They might have found a way around the 
lack of public services. But when toxic chemicals were found in public wells, 
the residents wondered what the hell the cities had done. They began to think 
that maybe they had been sold down the river. And they began to view their 
entrepreneurial neighbors with something less than the awe accorded them in 
the past.

On December 4, 1981, workmen were digging a hole for a new water tank at a 
South San Jose plant of Fairchild Semiconductor. They noticed rust-colored 
dirt around a chemical-storage tank that was already there. They dug deeper 
and found that industrial solvents were seeping through the bottom of the old 
tank, which had been in use since 1977.

Apparently, the aboveground gauge that was supposed to measure the volume of 
the liquid in the tank had failed. The system that monitored the balance of 
the chemicals as they came into the plant hadn't been checked. But the stain 
was extensive enough that Fairchild told Great Oaks Water Co., which had wells 
in the area, that there might be a problem.

Sure enough, there was. The well nearest the Fairchild plant was contaminated 
with one of the solvents that had been stored in the tank. A solvent 
containing 13,900 gallons of 1,1,1 trichloroethane (TCA) had leaked out, and 
concentrations of it in the well were nearly 20 times higher than what is 
considered acceptable by the Environmental Protection Agency. Great Oaks Water 
closed the well the next day.But then, on the advice of the state health 
department, neither Fairchild nor Great Oaks Water disclosed anything to the 
public about the accident for 50 days, although such an announcement was 
legally required within 39 days.

When Lorraine Ross opened the San Jose Mercury on January 20 and saw the story 
about the leak, she was at home with her three small children. She could see 
the Fairchild plant, which was about a quarter of a mile from her house. Her 
family got its water from Great Oaks Water.

She remembered the neighbors who had complained that the water tasted funny 
but who thought it might be the pipes. She recalled the times she smelled 
chlorine or ammonia in the air. But mostly she wondered about the four 
children with birth defects, the two miscarriages, and the one stillbirth on 
her block within the past three years and the multiple congenital heart 
defects of her youngest child, then nine months old. She wrote to the 
president of the water company and asked for an investigation.

Ross had grown up in San Jose, but she had never had much to do with the 
electronics industry. The technological revolution that was taking place in 
the low-lying buildings that had sprouted around the Valley like toadstools 
after a spring rain just didn't have much of an impact on her life.She missed 
the orchards she used to walk through as a kid, and didn't particularly care 
for the congestion, but she never thought of herself as being anti-industry, 
or even antigrowth. The birth defects in her neighborhood had made her 
nervous, but she hadn't known enough about the chemicals used to make 
semiconductors to attach her fears to anything concrete.

By the end of January, Lorraine Ross had a lot of questions. Her daughter had 
nearly died and still needed open-heart surgery. Maybe the chemicals in the 
water had caused the problem. Who, she wanted to know, let Fairchild build a 
semiconductor plant 2,000 feet from a public well? Who decided the storage 
tank was safe for industrial solvents? When trace amounts of other chemicals 
were found in other public wells, who decided it was all right for people to 
drink the water? Why had 50 days passed before the public was informed about 
the TCA in the well her family's water came from? Why was it that the Food and 
Drug Administration spent years researching drugs, but industrial chemicals 
were virtually unregulated? And why was it that people like herself, untutored 
in chemicals and completely outside the industry, had to complain before 
investigations were made?

Ross's questions attracted a lot of public attention. The San Jose Mercury 
News wrote a story about her. She got phone calls from the Associated Press 
and even the National Enquirer. People in her neighborhood called. They had 
problems too. Thirty-one birth disorders were reported to the Great Oaks Water 
district within days.

The residents discovered in a hurry that not only did the industry not 
regulate itself, but nobody else did either. Drinking water had been 
contaminated for months, maybe years, before the problem was discovered, and 
then only because workers were putting in a new tank nearby. Fairchild was not 
legally required to check its tanks, and, in fact, only after the spill was it 
obligated to reveal to a public agency the types and amounts of toxic 
chemicals being used.

There is a feeling of betrayal among the residents. They had trusted 
Fairchild, but the company had been so wrapped up in making faster and less 
costly chips that maybe it hadn't taken the safety of their neighborhood 
seriously enough. The residents were understandably even less enthusiastic 
about their corporate neighbors when they found that there were at least 36 
other leaks of hazardous chemicals stored or dumped in the Bay Area. The seven 
that were found in Santa Clara County were solvents used in making 
semiconductors. In one case, a tetrachloroethylene (TCE) leak from a tank used 
by Intel was recently discovered, even though the company had stopped using 
the chemical in that location in 1977.

The implications of the findings were frightening. Although most of the leaks 
did not contaminate water supplies, the chemicals were being used by 
high-technology companies all over the Bay Area and across the country.Scores 
of new chemicals were being developed and marketed every year. People began to 
think harder about some of the other "isolated incidents": The fire at 
Lockheed in Palo Alto that had required evacuation of 400 people in a 
residential area because of the possibility of a chemical explosion. The 
24-year-old woman who had begun to lose her hair after working with a chemical 
called antimony trioxide at Advanced Micro Devices.

The Santa Clara Center for Occupational Safety and Health gets 30 to 40 calls 
a week from workers who think they have problems somehow related to the 
chemicals they work with, and 60% of those callers are employed by the 
electronics industry. Amanda Hawes, a San Jose attorney who has specialized in 
chemical-related health problems since 1979, says she has been involved in 
about 100 such cases, and only recently have they been taken seriously. 
Initially such complaints were treated as "female hysteria," she says, or, in 
the case of men," a bad attitude."

When the residents started asking questions, they found that the handling and 
disposal of toxic chemicals is supposed to be regulated by the state's 
Department of Health Services. Although industry and government experts have 
questioned the wisdom of regulating nationally used chemicals by 50 different 
legislatures, most federal laws and regulations are aimed at controlling 
"pollution," not at the handling or storage of potentially hazardous 
substances. And cutbacks in federal spending and President Reagan's policy of 
reducing federal involvement in what he considers areas of state and local 
responsibility have limited the enforcement of the federal restrictions that 
exist.

In California, state efforts at control have been hampered by a lack of both 
money and knowledge. Although the California legislature ordered the 
Department of Health Services to develop a hazardous-waste management program 
more than two years ago, little progress has been made. Until TCA was found in 
public drinking water, regulating hazardous chemicals just wasn't a priority.

So the residents and the local governments are taking matters into their own 
hands. Ross and 15 of her neighbors have sued Fairchild, Great Oaks Water, and 
pertinent public entities, charging negligence.Lawyers for the residents 
expect as many as 100 more people to file suits. State and county officials 
are investigating the incidence of birth defects. San Jose has been trying to 
develop a model ordinance on handling and storage of toxic materials. The Palo 
Alto City Council is considering an ordinance that would require local 
companies to disclose the types and amounts of chemicals they use and store at 
their plants.

For companies, the solutions are going to be expensive. The Fairchild tank 
that leaked has been removed, and Fairchild is spending millions of dollars to 
dig up all its other underground tanks and place them in cement storage vaults 
that presumably would contain leaks if they occurred. But for the people like 
Ross it is a little late. And the residents will never look at the 
high-technology companies in quite the same way.

"I'm not anti-semiconductor industry," says Lorraine Ross. "But I don't want 
my health adversely affected by their profit-making. Companies should be 
willing to invest a portion of their profit to ensure they aren't damaging the 
environment." Curiously, lack of regulation made the industry more vulnerable. 
Public glorification of the industry made the fall harder, the residents more 
bitter.People expected more from this new industry. Many in Santa Clara County 
seemed to think it could do no wrong.

There are growing suspicions across the country that maybe this adoration has 
not been healthy, that maybe high technology does not have all the answers, 
that, in fact, it creates problems of its own. Toxic wastes brought this 
possibility to the attention of the residents of Santa Clara County. But there 
are other problems attracting national interest, problems like the transfer of 
high-technology secrets and products to the Soviets and to other powers not 
friendly to the United States.

Six years ago David Henry Roberts was the kind of guy the electronics industry 
likes to hold up as proof that in Silicon Valley opportunity exists for 
everyone. He was a local boy, born and brought up in Watsonville, a small 
dusty town about 40 miles from Mountain View, where he got his first job. He 
had started out in the warehouse at Elmar Electronics shortly after graduating 
from high school in 1970. He worked his way up to become a sales rep, earning 
more than $20,000 a year.

Roberts worked at Elmar for five years before he started job-hopping among 
components distributors. He moved to Hamilton Avnet Electronics, another 
distributor, back to Elmar, to Hamilton Avnet again, and then to Western 
Microtechnology Inc. He worked at Clear-Com Intercom Systems Inc., a San 
Francisco electronics manufacturer. In some fields the job changes might have 
been a sign of trouble, but in the electronics industry mobility is thought to 
demonstrate initiative. Besides, Roberts was a producer. He became known as a 
guy who could get components faster and cheaper than anyone else.

In 1978, Roberts supplied \$100,000 worth of integrated circuits to Larry 
Lowery, president of a series of small electronics companies, called, in 
chronological order, L&M Electronics, Brut Electronics, and O.C.S. It was a 
quick deal -- Roberts had set up the sale before he obtained the parts. But 
there was one problem: The circuits had been stolen from Elmar Electronics. 
And the police knew. In fact they had set up the employee who stole the chips 
and brought them to David Roberts. They found out that Roberts had received 
only \$612 for the goods, a fraction of what he would have gotten for 
legitimately procured parts, and they arrested him. As it turned out, that 
time Roberts was lucky. The case against him was dismissed on a technicality.

The arrest was a setback, but it didn't keep Roberts from continuing to work 
in electronics. Although the industry grapevine is generally considered 
effective, Hamilton Avnet didn't know Roberts had been arrested. He had a job 
there when he was arrested a year later for another theft, this time from 
Hamilton Avnet. He had forged invoices written on his employer's account. 
Again Lowery was the man behind him, but the police didn't have enough 
evidence to prosecute. However, Roberts's luck had run out. He was sentenced 
to 10 months at a work-furlough program at Elmwood Rehabilitation Center. And 
he found himself blackballed by the industry.He couldn't get a job in the 
distribution business. He started calling himself Hank Roberts and got a job 
with an industry headhunter. He even told his employer he had been involved in 
a court case. The headhunter was giving him a second chance. Roberts was 
bringing in $20,000 a month.

Then Lowery showed up again. Police linked him to the fencing of 11,000 
Synertek Inc. memory circuits valued at \$100,000 to \$150,000. And when the 
Santa Clara County Sheriff's Office got search warrants and seized Lowery's 
business records, handwriting experts determined that all records pertaining 
to the stolen Synertek parts had been written by David Roberts.

This time even Lowery was arrested, but the night before the preliminary 
hearings, a witness for the prosecution was beaten so badly he was unable to 
testify. And then, just before Lowery's trial was to begin, Roberts, who had 
been subpoenaed by the prosecution, was discovered near Skyline Boulevard in 
nearby San Mateo County with a fractured skull and seven stab wounds in his 
back.

Except for the murder of Roberts, it might have been just another story of a 
young man trying to go too far, too fast. It certainly wasn't the industry's 
fault that a quarter of a million dollars' worth of chips can be carried out 
of a stockroom in a briefcase or that circuit designs that cost \$500,000 to 
develop can be slipped into a coat pocket. But for a long time, law 
enforcement people say, the industry didn't seem to take the problem 
seriously. More than \$20 million a year in electronics technology and products 
were being stolen in Santa Clara County alone, estimates Douglas Southard, the 
county's deputy district attorney, and companies were leaving components in 
storerooms with locks less sophisticated than what they had on bathroom doors.

Companies didn't report thefts, sometimes out of concern about security 
implications to customers and sometimes because they didn't even know the 
thefts had happened. Inventory control at some companies was casual, says 
Southard -- stolen chips have been recovered and confessions extracted from 
thieves in cases where the company couldn't prove anything was missing. One 
large manufacturer, warned that a theft was planned for a specific date in the 
near future, prevented the theft but didn't fire the potential thief, who 
reportedly still works at the company and carries on a cocaine business.

There was, Southard and other observers say, an almost arrogant faith that a 
company's technological capabilities could overcome any other problems, that 
prosecuting thieves and tightening up security took time and resources away 
from the primary efforts -- coming up with newer and better products and 
making money. This attitude, says Southard, made stealing a lot easier. 
Employees -- technicians, inventory clerks, draftsmen, and engineers -- walked 
out with circuit designs, process information, precious metals, and 
market-ready chips. They stole chips that failed quality-control tests, 
mislabeled them top quality, and sold them in the legitimate marketplace. They 
even stole such finished goods, he says, as disk drives and personal 
computers.

Most thieves wouldn't get far without what has come to be called the "gray 
market," a system of distributors and middlemen, both legal and illegal, that 
picks up the slack between semiconductor manufacturers like National 
Semiconductor, Fairchild, and Signetics Corp., and the electronics equipment 
manufacturers that build the chips into their products. Large computer 
manufacturers usually deal directly with the semiconductor plants, but 
distributors sell to smaller customers, find markets for surpluses, and 
sometimes stock parts against shortages. Many of these distributors are 
reputable, but here, in the middle market, changing demand and the intense 
competition for parts, prices, and quick delivery support the companies and 
the people that are not. David Roberts couldn't have sold the stolen parts he 
obtained without this market.

The parts are hard to track, points out Southard.There is a lot of money to be 
made, or lost. If a manufacturer needs parts in a hurry, he doesn't ask the 
supplier where they came from. Industry executives tend to call this 
"business," but Southard has another word for it -- greed. "I was raised in 
southern California," he says, "with what I'll call Middle Western values. 
People were expected to better themselves gradually. Here, people have made so 
much money so fast. There's a kind of tension in the air. Everyone wants to 
become an overnight millionaire."

But it isn't the corporate victims of the thieves that concern the U.S. Senate 
and federal prosecutors. Some of the stolen components and technology have 
made their way to the Soviets, in violation of federal export regulations that 
restrict high-technology exports. They are worried that the stuff will show up 
not in toasters or microwave ovens, but in sophisticated "smart" bombs.

How much American technology is making its way illegally to other countries is 
difficult to estimate, but investigators seem to agree that seizures of 
illegal shipments and convictions for export violations obtained so far just 
scratch the surface. Last fall, the U.S. Customs Service formed special teams 
of customs agents, inspectors, patrol officers, and accountants to crack down 
on illegal exports of high technology.

As Assistant U.S. attorney, Theodore Wai Wu prosecuted three of the leading 
cases tried under the Export Administration Act and Arms Export Control Act in 
the last four years. The latest case involved a U.S.-West German-Soviet Union 
network that smuggled at least \$1.5 million worth of high-technology hardware, 
including computers and electronic surveillance systems, from the United 
States to the Soviet bloc. Anatoli Maluta, the Soviet-born U.S. connection in 
the ring, was convicted of conspiracy and 14 other felony counts last October, 
sentenced to five years in prison, and fined \$60,000. However, the alleged 
West German leader of the scheme, Werner Bruchhausen, is overseas somewhere 
and may never be brought to trial.

There is an attitude among some of these high-technology companies that this 
thievery is the government's problem, that trade restrictions are not in the 
best interests of the growth and development of the industry. One 
entrepreneur, convicted in December 1980 of illegally selling to the Soviet 
Union laser mirrors that could be used to develop laster weapons, went so far 
as to say during his trial that he thinks the government's regulations are 
wrong.

Federal officials didn't need a 10-year investigation to tell them the effects 
of selling high technology to the Soviets. They put together a special customs 
investigation team to crack down on illegal exports across the country. They 
sent in the FBI. And they warned the entrepreneurs that ignorance was no 
longer a good enough excuse. Their companies and their management would be 
held responsible for the final destination of their products.

A year ago Ken Boyd thought Scotts Valley, a small town in the redwoods of the 
Santa Cruz Mountains, seemed like a pleasant place to build his second 
company. He, his family, and two cows he kept as lawnmowers already lived 
there, for one thing. His partners were eager to move to Scotts Valley, for 
another. Although his Silicon Valley bank and his vendors would be a 30-minute 
drive away, the sky was blue, there wasn't any traffic, and employees might be 
less inclined to shop for new jobs on their lunch hours since there were fewer 
local employers to choose from. Santa Cruz and the Pacific were just 15 
minutes west. Besides, he figured, he would be in good company. Alan F. 
Shugart had started his second venture, Seagate Technology, in Scotts Valley 
in 1979, and for the last half of 1981 sales were $14 million. Watkins-Johnson 
had a plant there, too.

So although Silicon Valley had been a great place to start his first company, 
an engineering consulting group, Ken Boyd decided last fall to set up his 
second venture, Stresstel, in Scotts Valley.

Twelve months later Boyd talks wistfully about returning "home," to Silicon 
Valley. Scotts Valley is a great place to live, he says, but he isn't sure 
what he thinks about doing business there. "It's kind of like gambling in 
Elko," he explains. "The game hasn't changed, but it just doesn't feel the 
same."

Boyd can't shake this feeling that entrepreneurs aren't appreciated in Scotts 
Valley. People have said they don't want their small mountain town becoming 
another Silicon Valley. Boyd says he would rather be somewhere he is really 
wanted.

Besides, he says, "I don't find what has happened to the Santa Clara Valley 
repulsive." He thinks the development could have been planned and executed 
better, but "it's still the best place to live in the U.S." The entrepreneurs 
will learn to cope with the problems technically, he feels. Of course being 
the president of a start-up, Boyd is a busy man. He doubts that he will have 
the time, at least in the near future, to work on the problems.

But there are people like Lorraine Ross who will. People who have learned that 
entrepreneurs are first and foremost entrepreneurs. People who won't wait for 
the high-technology companies to come up with technical solutions. People who, 
instead of cheering or buying stock when they hear about the watches that glow 
in the dark, will wonder whether what makes them glow is toxic and where the 
plant is located. People who will push regulations through their local fire 
departments, their city councils, their state legislatures. People who will 
support special industry taxes for the power, the water, and the 
transportation. People who will pass referenda limiting growth.

The solutions these people come up with may not be the best for the 
high-technology companies. They may not even be the best for the communities. 
Lorraine Ross's knowledge of the chemicals used in the manufacture of 
semiconductors is still unsophisticated, and the answers she comes up with may 
not be the most efficient or effective. They may even be reactions against 
finding TCA in her well or against having assumed for years that Fairchild and 
the other high-tech companies had everyone's best interests at heart. But they 
certainly will hold the companies accountable not only for their bottom lines, 
but for their impact on the people and the environment around them.

Even in Silicon Valley things have changed. The years of uncritical support 
are probably over. This may be a time for national skepticism, a time when 
good intentions are not enough, when companies are expected to imitate the 
efforts of Hewlett-Packard and donate executive time to work on civic 
problems, when residents follow the lead of Lorraine Ross and find the 
babysitters or the time from jobs to enable them to learn what is really going 
on in their neighborhoods and what they can do about it. This may be a decade 
when the high-technology companies and the residents come of age in the old 
sense of the phrase, into responsibility as well as privilege.


