---
layout: post
title: bernstein1977paradox
tags: [reading notes, criticism, Santa Clara County, transportation, pollution, housing, Frederick Terman, San Jose, Stanford University]
categories:
- Chapter 3
---

> {% reference} bernstein1977paradox %}

## Item

[bernstein1977paradox.pdf](/files/bernstein1977paradox.pdf)

## Notes

p. 1: Santa Clara County is "one of the fastest growing regions in the United
States. Population, now 1,200,000, has nearly doubled since 1960. Economic
development as well as population growth has been concentrated in the
northwest part of the county, extending from Palo Alto in the north, to San
Jose, the county seat and population center. In 1956, San Jose covered 22
square miles. Today it spreads over 140 square miles of surrounding land."

p. 3: "The rapid expansion of industrial parks and electronics plants has
accelerated the process of urban sprawl, covering the old orchards with
low-density factories and tracts. Because industry has chosen to concentrate
in the northwest county, and cities provided more land for industry than
housing, many employees, particularly lower income workers, are unable to
find housing near their jobs."

p. 3: The result of the housing shortage has caused "increased commuting and
heavy traffic flows snarl local highways and roads. Increased automobile use
has intensified local pollution problems."

p. 3: Notes that northern cities have a robust industrial tax base, whereas
southern cities lack the tax base and additionally provide most of the
services for commuting workers.

p. 3: Identifying the main problems: pollution, housing, taxes, job security,
local over-dependence on military spending. The origin of these problems
according to the pamphlet is the high technology industries.

p. 4: High technology's location in Santa Clara County is a result of "a
naturally pleasant climate, [and] it offered a combination of land, labor,
technological resources, financing, and access to markets."

p. 4-5: Notes the historical origins of Stanford's interest in electronics,
dating to 1909 and the formation of the Federal Telegraph Company by Cyrus
Elwell. In the 1930s, Frederick Terman began encouraging his students to
create their own companies rather than migrate to the east coast. Terman's
students included John Kaar (Kaar Industries - two way radios), Bill Hewlett
and David Packard, and Russell and Sigurd Varian.

p. 6: Cites the central role played by Terman in creating a place where
electronics research could flourish. Calls it his "conscious vision" for the
Peninsula and quotes him: "We have been pioneers in creating a new type of
community, one that I have caleld a 'community of technical scholars.' Such a
community is composed of industries using highly sophisticated technologies,
together with a strong university that is sensitive to the creative activities
of the surrounding industry. This pattern appears to be the wave of the
future."

p. 7: The establishment of the Industrial Park attracted a range of
industries, including Sylvania, Philco, GE, and Lockheed. Quoting Lockheed
official Douglas Moffat: "We moved to get better access to the right sort of
manpower so that we could establish a working environment with the right
intellectual atmosphere."



