---
layout: post
title: sanjose1958masterplan
tags: [reading notes, San Jose, master plan]
categories:
- Readings
---

## San Jose City Planning Commission. *Master Plan of the City*. San Jose: City of San Jose, 1958.

p. 1: The site of the city first traveled on November 26, 1770 "when Lt. Pedro
Fages, the first commandante of the Presidio of Monterey, led a party on an
unsuccessful attempt to encircle San Francisco Bay." The city was formally
established on November 29, 1777, as El Pueblo de San Jose de Guadalupe (the
town of Saint Joseph on the River Guadalupe) by recommendation of Don Felipe
de Neve, Governor of California under King Carlos III of Spain.

p. 2: Describes Indians as "in general docile, dirty, timid and slow to war.
The Indians dressed either in mud, grasses, furs -- or went naked -- as the
prevailing weather dictated."

pp. 3-4: Settlers moved the Pueblo from its often-flooding marsh to higher ground
in 1791 near current-day City Hall Plaza on Market Street.

p. 4: Population figures: 68 at the time of founding, to 171 in 1800.

p. 4: Noting the production of grains and experimental cultivation of hemp and
flax in 1797. Livestock numbered between 980 and 6600.

p. 10: The diversified economy of mid-1800's San Jose focused on orchards and
vineyards that "proved as rewarding as the gold fields."

p. 10: The water problems of the area were "solved" in 1854 when the first
artesian water supply was tapped for the first time. "A well on San Fernando
Street flowed a stream 4 feet wide by six inches deep for six weeks desite all
efforts to cap it."

p. 11: The Plan outlines four stages of economic development: before the
arrival of miners seeking gold, the main economic activity was the production
of hides and tallow from cattle and sheep; the second, until 1875, saw grain
replace grazing; a third when dried prunes and orchards of fruits and nuts,
increasing in acreage from 20,000 acres in the 1880s to almost 100,000 by the
turn of the century. The last era of industrialization is high tech.

p. 13: During the 1940s, San Jose and Santa Clara County had rates of
population growth of 39% and 66% respectively, compared to a statewide 53%.

p. 14: "Since World War II, over 200 new manufacturing and distributing
industries have located in the County. These firms alone have invested over
$200,000,000 in facilities and have an annual payroll of about $100,000,000
for their more than 25,000 employees."

p. 14: "San Jose is designed to become a large city, and with vision and
foresight, it can become one of America's great cities."

p. 15: Noting that improvements to transportation, many people live in either
suburban or rural areas. The Plan says that it may be more meaningful to speak
of the metropolis as areas of communities rather than treat each municipality
as self-sufficient unit.

p. 16: 200,000 residents in San Jose by 1957, many employed in yearly personal
income of $1,200,000,000, and an agricultural income of $100,000,000.

p. 17: The city permitted building permits that valued $210,000,000 worth
issued in 1956. Investments in industrial capacity exceeded $130,000,000 in
1956.

pp. 17-18: "Because of its prominence in the system, San Jose has accepted
responsibility for the planning of the entire area which is likely to come
within the City's boundaries. . . . the cities in San Jose's immediate area
have common interests in matters of economics, education, recreation,
circulation and cultural facilities."

p. 18: "San Jose is intimately concerned with development in the contiguous
communities of Alviso, Campbell, Cupertino, Los Gatos, Milpitas, Monte Sereno,
Santa Clara, Saratoga, and Sunnyvale. Of concern, but to a lesser degree, is
the development in the cities of Gilroy, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Morgan
Hill, Mountain View and Palo Alto."

p. 21: "Wise and far-sighted planning becomes more important as we project the
many present-day problems several decades into the future. The value of
specific planning for thoroughfares, water supply, sanitation, drainage,
schools and park sites will become more evident as the population of the San
Jose area grows to four or five times its present population."

p. 22: "the climate, the land and the water are still major attractions."

p. 22: "In the center of the county is most of the fertile Santa Clara
Valley."

p. 22: The valley rises from sea level to the north to four hundred feet at
the south end of the county, drained by Coyote Creek and the Guadalupe River
and their tributaries.

p. 24: "Rich, fine-textured soils of the highest agricultural value occupy the
flood plains immediately adjacent to stream channels throughout the valley."

p. 27: The climate is generally mild, with dry summers (moderate daytime temps
and cool nights), and wet winters with moderate temperatures. The majority of
rainfall falls between November and March and averages 14 inches. The growing
season on average in San Jose is 305 days.

p. 27: "we are concerned with the ever-increasing pollution of the air and the
valley by the industry, incinerators and automobiles of the Bay Area."

p. 28: Wells numbered over 2,000 by 1900, and as of 1957 numbered 4,000. The
Plan warns that the once-believed unlimited water supply is "now inadequate
and thought must be given to both the importation of water and increased
conservation of surface run-off water. At the same time, consideration must be
given to methods of controlling flood waters that course the valley with
increasing severity."
    * There's no mention about why the severity increases, but unspoken might
    be the result of urbanization.

p. 28: "Surface waters infiltrate into the underground reservoir at the sides
of the valley where the alluvial gravels are near the surface of the ground in
the upper portions of the valley."

p. 29: "Recognizing that the underground water supply depended upon the
conservation of the winter run-off; orchardists in 1913 began to give
consideration to methods of storing and percolating the waters from the winter
rains."

p. 29: The effort to form a water conservation district were begun in 1921.
The Santa Clara Valley Water Conservation District was approved in November
1929.

p. 30: Between 1935 and 1944, there was a net gain in underground water
levels, but since 1944 the demand of enlarged industrial community for water
has exceeded run-off water available for percolation during several dry years.

p. 30: State of California estimates that Santa Clara Valley will need 184,000
acre feet of water annually.

p. 32: Winter rains causing problems of streams overflowing. "The depletion of
the underground water supply has had a direct effect on the seriousness of the
Valley's flood problems. Floods, their causes and remedies, are of concern to
planners who must approve subdivision and land use plans, lay out major
thoroughfares and other facilities."

p. 33: "Other metropolitan areas of the state are not as fortunate in the
educational status of their new citizens."

p. 33: "It is to be expected that, with an exceptional climate, space and a
beautiful area within which to grow, educational advantages, and a good
employment potential, the San Jose area would experience tremendous growth."

p. 35: In 1928 the City first developed comprehensive zoning laws.

p. 50: San Jose still desires a deep water port in 1958. "There has always
been some enthusiasm for the development of Alviso as a port which would be
capable of handling vessels of intermediate size. The existence of deep water
shipping facilities would make the area more attractive to industries and
shippers. Prospects for development of port facilities are again being
considered."

p. 54: "the people's increasing reliance on the automobile as a substitute for
transit continues to increase."

p. 63: The Plan argues that the design of the city and its neighborhoods
should serve a set of values--cultural, sociological, and aesthetic as well as
physical or economic.

p. 89: "Each segment of the city has a natural cycle of growth--obsolescence
and decay--and then renewal." The plan calls for: preventing existing blight
from spreading; to rehabilitate areas that can be restored economically; and,
to clear and rebuild areas that are economically "not worth saving."

