---
layout: post
title: walker2008countrycity
date: 2014-12-01
tags: [reading notes, open space, Bay Area, environmentalism, political culture, Stanford University, Committee for Green Foothills, Karl Belser, Wallace Stegner]
categories:
- Readings
---

[@walker2008countrycity]

**Thesis**: Walker posits that the San Francisco Bay Area is exceptionally
"green," which traces itself to groups of (mostly white) middle-class
professional elites that took an interest in preserving the Bay Area's
landscape. He is interested in telling the story of how the Bay Area "got its
green groove," arguing that the "greenbelt is not a natural product of social
progress and dawning enlightenment, but something that has been won through
decades of effort."^[@walker2007countrycity, 4.] At the core of the story is a
"green political culture" that forms a key characteristic of the Bay Area's
identity.

Walker also explicitly writes for the San Francisco Bay: The book is "meant to
help those who live in the San Francisco Bay Area appreciate what they have
and what they have done."^[@walker, xvii.]

**General Scope**: Walker focuses his attention on the broad history of the
Bay Area's environment, beginning with John Muir and the Sempervirens Club,
then exploring mining, agriculture, the origins of the recreational park
system, the anti-growth suburbanites in the postwar era, the Save the Bay
movement, and the Napa and Sonoma wine country, and ends with the battles
against pollution and toxics "in the neighborhoods of the working class and
the dark-hued poor."^[@walker2007countrycity, 5.]

**Methodology**: Walker uses oral history interviews (conducted by him and
others, now deposited at the University of Berkeley), newspapers,
organizational newsletters, and governmental documents to support his claims.

Walker uses the idea of *urbanized countryside* and *ruralized city* in his
analysis.

**Critique**: Walker does little to talk beyond these white elites that formed
the core of what he views as environmentalism. There are times when the book
reads more like a laundry list of environmental organizations and does little
to really dive into their intellectual, political, or social underpinnings
that explain how these organizations came to be interested in particular
issues or what attracted members to specific organizations. Nor do we hear
much from suburbanites---both those included and excluded---and their
experiences. How does race factor into these issues? Do environmental
organizations consider race much? Are there class differences between these
environmental elites and others concerned about environmental issues that
Walker fails to address? Why is the story exclusive to elites? What about the
role of Mexican Americans, Japanese Americans, and African Americans in
attempting to resolve environmental issues and promote environmental justice?

I am also unclear on how exactly these popular movements worked together to
foster the Bay Area's green groove. Walker, for example, notes the importance
of women in the movements but only hints at the personal networking that went
on.

Nor does Walker fully explain why the region became a green capital. He says
that it was not because of preexisting beauty, but the story often reads that
way. Nor does Walker explore something that seems very core to their
successes: often, these battles were won because voters elected green-minded
officials. Why do Bay Area voters become more prone to elect these voters? Put
another way, does the "green political culture" promote voting for
green-minded public officials, or does the presence of green-minded public
officials help generate a "green political culture"? Walker has an
chicken-or-egg problem.

The book is also heavily celebratory. Walker is a native of the Santa Clara
Valley, and remembers growing up "with the Santa Cruz Mountains as a backdrop,
the open foothills behind Stanford as a playground " He recalls "the orchards
of Santa Clara Valley were still in bloom, the redwoods of Big Basin and
Memorial Park beckoned, and the beaches of Pescadero, San Gregorio, and
Capitola were practically empty."^[@walker2007countrycity, xv.] I can't help
but wonder how his experiences colored his view of the Bay Area's
environmentalism.

To Walker's credit, he lays out his politics clearly. "The tale I have to tell
is by no means dispassionate, but it is no less objective and worth reading
for that. I have tried to tell it as honestly and thoroughly as possible. My
red side tells me I should have been more critical of everything and everyone,
but my green side wants this to be an upbeat lesson in the art of the
possible."^[@walker2007countrycity, xviii.]

Walker is very open about his politics: he says his political education began
as a New Deal Democrat, but also appreciates the old liberal Republicans
"lurking in the greenbelt story, because I still remember a day when
Republican did not equate to George W. Bush and his Horsemen of the
Apocalypse."^[@walker2007countrycity, xviii.] He says he still lives by the
"good old-time religion of the New Deal" despite reading Karl Marx at John
Hopkins and still doing Marxist economics in his day job.

Walker also says he was "awakened to environmental politics by the Save the
Bay movement and the Sierra Club's campaign to protect the Grand Canyon. Close
to home, I heard of strange conflict over Stanford University's land-use
plans---conflicts in which my dad played a big part---while I was still young.
Naturally, I ended up on the side opposite my father and the university
administration he loved."^[@walker2007countrycity, xv.]

**Context**: Walker is arguing against the prevailing interpretation that as
the city grows it obliterates nature. He points to Adam Rome and Edward Soja
who see history erased from landscapes and who view cities as separate from
nature---the city is built-up, while the countryside is where nature reigns.
Instead, Walker sees the city and country evolving together, citing George
Henderson's claim that in California the "city and countryside developed in
tandem." Walker says we cannot continue to perceive cities as "latecomers
invading pristine rural landscapes" and argues that "we are complicit with the
profound American amnesia regarding history and geography." In the end, he
claims, "the countryside has always depended on the city, coexisted within the
urban realm, and left its mark on urban forms."^[@walker2007countrycity,
5--6.]

Walker's launching point is Raymond Williams's *The Country and the City*, who
showed the intertwined nature of urban and rural social orders in England.
Walker sees the same thing in America, where views about conservation were
"born out of the encounter of the city and the country." Moreover,
conservationists and environmentalists were motivated by struggle "over the
*nearby* countryside, where the city gave way to the
suburbs."^[@walker2007countrycity, 6.]

Walker also suggests that the environment urbanites care most about is not
far-off wilderness areas, but the nature that is nearby. The "wilderness
obsession was made the mantra of environmental history" with Roderick Nash's
*Wilderness and the American Mind*, and Walker suggests starting instead with
Leo Marx's *Machine in the Garden* and Henry Nash Smith's *Virgin Land* where
Americans attempt to confront modernity in the countryside and the loss of a
rural past from the perspective of the city. Kenneth Jackson's *Crabgrass
Frontier* and Peter Schmitt's *Back to Nature* are further examples of how the
country intermingled with the city, but Walker claims environmental historians
are only just beginning to break with "the wilderness tradition and get back
to the cities."^[@walker2007countrycity, 6.]

**Quote Bank**:

"In the nine-county San Francisco region, 3.75 million of 4.5 million acres
are greenbelt and open water, and less than 750,000 acres lie beneath
buildings and pavements. More than 1 million acres of open space are
protected, or are what advocates call secure greenbelt. The Bay Areas has the
most extensive such greensward in the country. It includes a patchwork of more
than 200 publicly owned parks and reserves within 40 miles of San Francisco
covering an area larger than Yosemite National Park. At the heart of the
metropolitan region is the bay itself, another 725,000 acres of water and
wetlands guarded by government regulation. Agriculture occupies the largest
swath of unpaved surface, 1.8 million acres, and woodlands the rest, about a
half-million acres."^[@walker2007countrycity, 3.]

Says Stanford "played midwife to the birth of microelectronics and the digital
age in the postwar era" but that the university also "has been a prime target
for environmental rebellion."^[Richard Walker, *The Country in the City: The
Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2008), 100.]

Says the Committee for Green Foothills has been the "leading force for open
land on the peninsula for almost 50 years."^[Richard Walker, *The Country in
the City: The Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of
Washington Press, 2008), 100.]


Among the founding members of CGF^[Richard Walker, *The Country in the City: The
Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2008), 101.]:

* Lois and George Hogle
* Martin Litton
* Jack and Eleanor Fowle
* Morgan and Katy Stedman
* Richard Cutter
* Wallace Stegner

Notes the Battle of the Hills, gives credit to the Committee for Green
Foothills for the referendum?^[Richard Walker, *The Country in the City: The
Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2008), 101.]

* The history isn't quite right here. People in the Committee were likely
involved, but not central.

A proposal resurfaces in 1969 known as the Coyote Hill Plan; the CGF sues. The
university wins.^[Richard Walker, *The Country in the City: The Greening of
the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008),
101.]

Stanford also developed an office park along Sand Hill Road to the north of
campus. But the developer, Tom Ford, becomes a friend of the Committee (Walker
calls this "delicious irony").^[Richard Walker, *The Country in the City: The
Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area* (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2008), 101.]


Pete McCloskey — look into him

The Committee had strong ties to various other conservation groups

* Wallace Stegner and Martin Litton were Sierra Club directors in the 1960s
(102)
* Stegner heavily influenced by Bernard DeVoto and David Brower (102)
* Litton was a defender of redwoods, the Grand Canyon, and Mineral King (102)
* Morgan Stedman was on the Santa Clara County Planning Commission and
resisted sprawl (102)
* Barbara Eastman was a key organizer in Save Our Seashore (102)
* Dorothy Varian was a member of the Conservation Associates and a friend
(102)
* Bill and Mel Lane, owners of Sunset, were longtime allies. Mel directed the
Bay and Coastal commissions. (102)
* Eleanor Fowle was the sister of Alan Cranston, a former real estate broker
in Los Angeles and a Democratic Senator.
* Lewis Mumford wrote Ruth Spangenberg at the founding that "since Dr.
Tresidder's death the university has gone more more 'fashionable' and more
expensive advice, promising immediate profits and ultimate debacle. Keep up
the fight. The weight of good sense and public decency is on your side!" (102)

Between 1960 to 1985, Stanford University doubled its building space from four
million to eight million square feet; a fight broke out in 1985 over a
proposal for the Reagan Library to exist in the foothills.^[Richard Walker,
*The Country in the City: The Greening of the San Francisco Bay Area*
(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008), 103.]

**Broader Notes**:
